*DISCLAIMER: Sorry for the profanity.*

I’m turning a quarter of a century next Tuesday—that’s the 12th of June, for all
of y’all keeping track at home—and naturally that gets me thinking. There are
many aspects about my life that I’m further along than I thought I’d be when I
planned my life—the sort of “planning” any teenager does at one point—and really
goddamn behind in other respects.

This is not going to be a review of my life. Ain’t noone got time for that.
Instead I’m going to write a mai-tai-fueled, teenage-angst-styled blog post
about my angst. How meta.

## Where I am

Two months ago I got married to [the best person](http://malongi.com/) I ever
met. That’s definitely a plus. From time to time I get these feelings of “I
don’t deserve this”, but I’m trying my best at being a loving, supportive
partner and treating her the way she deserves and that’s—well, the best I can
do, I guess.

I have one of the best work environments I could imagine being in at the moment.
I’m surrounded by kind people, I’m friends—or at least honestly friendly—with
all of them, and I get to work on hard problems. [I went job-hunting last month](https://blog.veitheller.de/Job_Hunting.html), and I came back knowing how
much happier I’d be staying at my current job, so I did that.

I never fully recovered from that depressive state I was in when I studied
psychology in Salzburg. I still have these throwbacks into a state of feeling
miserable, but I can manage them well, usually. I usually just write a few
cathartic blog posts, create an “artwork” or two—y’know, those trivial-feeling
pieces I put [on that website](https://veitheller.de/art/)—, and recover. Maybe
I should talk to a therapist, but it’s never acute, and I know how to
self-medicate using little more than a metric ton of cigarettes and booze and
weed. I know that doesn’t sound healthy, but I guess it’s exaggerated anyway.

And this brings me to the next point: I sometimes have the emotional maturity of
a teenager. That’s probably not something that people notice when they meet me
in person, and something my wife vehemently denies, but it definitely _feels_
true. This blog post is living proof that sometimes I’m a little more vain,
self-deprecating, and just generally AIM-ICQ—y than I’d like myself to be.

There’s way more factors in my life I won’t get into in this blog post because
right now they do not feel as acute—among other things that I’m shit with
money, I have intrusive thoughts more often than is normal—I think—, our plans
of escaping this shithole of a city—yup, Berlin—keep getting delayed.

## Fin

I can’t keep bothering you. I decided that 500 words of not-quite-sober rambling
are enough, and I’m going to keep my promise.

I love each and every one of my readers. I hope that next year I’ll be gentler,
wiser, more loving, more productive, and less dependent on a system that I
despise than this year.
