**Note:** If you don’t feel the need to talk about blockchain things with
everyone you meet, this blog post is probably not for you. It wasn’t for me,
either.

There are certain topics that seem to grip people enough to make them want to
enter discussions with me. Some are benign, like why any particular programming
paradigm is superior or inferior to another. Some are important enough to cause
strife, like the “culture wars” or minority rights. I’m usually not very vocal
about my personal opinions on any of these topics, though—or because–some of my
positions might be considered extreme<sup><a href="#1">1</a></sup>. I try not
to have opinions on everything, and follow the “strong positions, weakly held”
rule.

A topic that keeps coming up is that of blockchain technologies and
decentralized finance. For me, this topic is somewhat of a nemesis, because it
occupies an annoying space in the continuum of mundane/important: the
technological underpinnings of the idea are easily debatable, but their
cultural significance has a deep political impact.

The discussions that I’ve encountered around this have been particularly
unpleasant as well. I’m skeptical of the value of blockchain technologies in
the larger financial context, but without any fixed talking points, I’ve often
been painted as having the knee-jerk reaction of the traditional left against
anything finance.

This blog post, then, is my attempt at explaining why I’m not on the hype
train. And, to noone’s surprise, it won’t be very technical.

## Blockchain, Anarchism, and Cthulhu

When people have discussions about the merit of the blockchain space, they
often revolve around technology or fixing a broken system–finance–by
democratizing it. But most of the time they stop short of going very deep into
the issue, and I think the most interesting ideas, and the reasons for why I
oppose it, lie in the fundamental societal assumptions surrounding its value
proposition. Let me explain.

I would describe the act of democratizing finance by making the market a direct
action, grass-roots system as a fundamentally anarcho-capitalist
endeavour<sup><a href="#2">2</a></sup>. A lot of people probably shy away from
using that term, because it is controversial, but I think it captures the
essence like no other: you are moving away from statism, and you do so by
appointing the famous “invisible hand of the market” as your god-like oracle.

This is where my first critique starts: if “the hand of the market” is a god, it
is a Lovecraftian blind idiot god. It is not an intelligent creator, it knows
not what it builds and destroys<sup><a href="#3">3</a></sup>.

Democratization is always a Promethean act. This sounds pretentious, but it
gives us a good metaphor to follow: Prometheus took the fire from the gods to
give it to man. What are you taking from the blind idiot god to give to us?

Another one of the axioms of my thinking is that a fundamentally broken system
is not fixed by democratization. It needs to be done away with. To bestialize
a German aphorism attributed to Thorsten Dirks: if you democratize a shitty
system, you end up with a shitty democratic system.

## Decentralized Finance, Smart Contracts, and the Byzantine Empire

We can go further than this, and examine Decentralized Finance on its value
proposition of creating a better financial market. I want to be clear that I’m
at this point not talking about your regular run-of-the-mill Coin market, which
emulates the most mundane financial operation: commodity trading in a vacuum.
People get excited by the amounts of money thrown around, yes, but it is
important to keep in mind that exchanging a thing for another does not create
wealth, it merely redistributes it. I don’t care if the transactions are
verifiable if the market they operate in is, at its core, rotten.

Decentralized finance, then, becomes more interesting when we talk about such
things as smart contracts and governance, and trying to do away with exchanges
and all the cruft that we wanted to not have anymore in the first place. But it
is also, currently, where it becomes the most absurd. The systems, both
technical and organizational, that people come up with are either more or less
obviously broken or become so byzantine so quickly (see, for instance, [the
structure of
MakerDAO](https://docs.makerdao.com/#the-maker-protocol-smart-contract-modules-system)<sup><a href="#4">4</a></sup>)
that we have come full circle: a new beast is born that can only be managed by the
appointed few, not by the unwashed masses. Again, the market did not create, it
merely redistributed.

You could call these system “meritocracies”, if you believed these existed. But
then, aren’t the existing financial markets also meritocracies, ruled by those
that understand finance and law, rather than tech and a little bit of finance?
Maybe, maybe not. But to me, it doesn’t feel like an accident that
Decentralized Finance proponents slowly learn all the little reasons for the
rules and regulations that are in play in finance. The Byzantine Empire has a
bad reputation, [but maybe that’s more due to ignorance than through any fault
of its own](https://aleteia.org/2018/11/13/why-are-complex-things-called-byzantine/).

The tune of tech’s hubris and its desire to reinvent everything from first
principles without consulting domain experts is an old one, but I can only play
the notes you put in front of me.

## The mantra I do not wish to keep singing

I understand that this post might spark the urge to discuss with me. I’m too
tired to spend my already mostly awful time on the internet discussing touchy
topics with strangers, not that that has ever stopped anyone. If you do want to
talk about topics like this one with me, maybe we should form a personal
connection first.

Finally, I want to make something very clear: just because I do not wander off
into the promised land doesn’t mean that I’m happy where we are at. The current
system needs change, in more places than finance. But I don’t believe that any
change is good, or that the only way is up.

#### Footnotes

<span id="1">1.</span> This blog is my personal blog, yes, but it’s also linked
to my professional identity. It’s difficult to speak freely about any particular
issue when your livelihood is on the line.

<span id="2">2.</span> One of the people I asked to review this blog post asked
me whether I meant that to be a good or bad thing. I didn’t intend this to be a
value judgement: the label is just a descriptor. It is useful to note that I’m
not a proponent of anarcho-capitalism myself.

<span id="3">3.</span> You will have to live with my colourful metaphors for a
                       while. I promise they all lead somewhere. If the
                       narrative of my imagery is offensive to you, I
                       apologize. Feel free to rebutt in an equally off-kilter
                       tone.

<span id="4">4.</span> I’ve tried to verify that the MakerDAO modules work as
claimed, but my ignorance of the ecosystem—[why is there a magic value
there?](https://github.com/dapphub/ds-chief/blob/master/src/chief.sol#L96)
[Why are the log events implemented in assembly?](https://github.com/makerdao/median/blob/master/src/median.sol#L29-L45)—made
this impossible in the limited time I wanted to give it.
