Dear Will,

I've been drinking too much. That sentence sounds more dramatic than the
reality: I've been drinking little, maybe the equivalent of two beers, but every
day for the past few weeks. I shouldn’t think too much about it, I know, but
it’s unsettling. I’m watching my bad habits closely, lest they turn into
addictions. It's probably the smoking.

It's still dark as I write this. My days have been erratic, largely fueled by an
existential angst that drives me to be at least a little productive. I’m not
terribly motivated, so I’m not creating as much as I was when we worked on our
last project together. Its sole purpose is to combat my feelings of uselessness.
Have you ever felt so utterly useless that you thought there couldn't possibly
be any good coming from your work? I don't want to say that's how I feel, but
that's how I feel.

Objectively speaking I know I've done some things, of course. But my portfolio
is full of useless toys, and now I’ve spent a full two months building more
useless toys. That's not what scares me: what scares me is that I don’t feel
like building anything but useless toys. My gag reflex triggers at the word
“project”.

I don’t think I'll come back to the company. I don’t think it would be in the
best interest of any of us. I’ve enrolled in a graduate program.  I’m not
thrilled to go back to university and be surrounded by people who think they
know more than they do—wouldn’t I just fit perfectly into that crowd?—, but it
seems better than any of the other options. It certainly seems better than any
new “projects”—gag—or “businesses”—gag.

It’s not the first time I've let you down. I hope that you can forgive me in
time.  You’re my friend, and I hate doing business with you, because all of the
moves that have an impact on our business relationship feel like they could
damage our friendship. I don’t want to let you down constantly. You know you
have my utmost loyality. But I feel like loyality is not the path to take right
now.

The coffee around here is pretty good. I haven’t really sat in a coffee shop
during the week to work in a really long time. The coldbrew is killer.

Veit
