Maybe I’m too small, thought Koala. She was on the hunt for a new place to rest
her head after one of the big mean Koala guys kicked her out of her favorite
tree again. Maybe small Koalas shouldn’t be climbing trees.

Finally she found a little hollow rock that seemed to fit her just right. She
climbed into it and rolled up into a furry little ball. Just a moment to let my
tiny eyes get some rest, she thought. This cave is oddly soft and warm, and it
feels so nice.

"Hello, grey one", said Turtle. "The rock moves! And it talks!", Koala
exclaimed. Her ears wiggled nervously. "I’m not a rock", said Turtle, "I'm a
turtle. And you’re in my shell." Koala blinked once. And then blinked again.
Then she said, "I’m awfully sorry, Mister Turtle. I didn’t mean to disturb you!
I just needed a moment you see." Turtle turned around and Koala saw his face for
the first time. He smiled a gentle, toothless smile. "It’s quite okay. You are
soft and warm and I rarely get visits. I’m sorry I startled you." He paused,
frowned, and asked, "Who are you? I’ve never seen a creature like you, and you
look quite particular." Koala blushed, but her fur concealed it well. "I’m a
Koala. We usually live in trees, so you might not see us very often from the
ground. We don’t move much."

"I see", said Turtle. "But I’m not a tree, you see. Don’t get me wrong, I enjoy
your company, but I’m afraid I’m not very tall, and the view from within my
shell can’t compare, I fear." Koala looked downtrodden. "I know, but the big
Koalas up in the trees always kick me out. I can’t ever just rest for a few
minutes without someone taking my spot." Turtle smiled again. "Well, in that
case I’m happy to host you for however long you need. Make yourself at home." He
yawned. "I’m a little tired. I’ll get back to sleep if that’s okay." Koala
curled up again and wiggled her butt a little to find a nice spot for it on
Turtle’s back. Finally, she sighed, "Thank you, Mister Turtle. You are quite
nice", but she already heard him snore again, so she closed her eyes.

After a few minutes, if you listened closely from outside the shell, you’d heard
the gentle breathing of two tiny creatures who were no longer alone.
