After having spent two days working at the Recurse Center—the intro day doesn't
really count here—, I feel like I should comment on my experience again. It has
been an amazing experience overall. I have seldom been as productive as I am
right now—maybe only during the height of my work on
[zepto](https://github.com/zepto-lang/zepto). But that is not the main reason
I'm excited; that would be my newly found workflow and productivity tooling that
I shamelessly stole from the Recurse Center standard. Let me walk you through
them.

## Check ins are awesome

Two days in I've already developed a deep love for “check-ins”. Check-ins are
little lists or essays at the beginning or end of the day, detailing what you
did the last day and what you plan on doing the next day. This provides a nice
resource for you to look at during the day if you're unsure what to do next,
which is one of my main problems when working on a bunch of small projects
during the day. It also helps me be honest to myself about whether I was
productive during the day. I tend to leave work thinking I didn't do a lot
during the day, and it takes active reevaluation for me to really know whether
my productivity was bad, normal, or exceptional.

![](/images/checkin.png)

<div class="figure-label">Fig. 1: A typical check in.</div>

It's not all about me, though. It also engages your readers—in this case, other
Recursers—, and possibly incentivizes them to pair with you. I myself have
paired with people because of items on their check-in on both days. This serves
as a perfect transition to my second favorite new thing to keep me productive
and happy, pairing.

## One is the loneliest number

I've not discovered pairing during my time at the Recurse Center. I've certainly
paired with people before, and it's always been fun. I vividly remembered
pairing with my room mate on one of my first programming projects, an [editor
for live coding visuals and music](https://github.com/VetoProjects/VetoLC)
written in C++. We spent long nights fueled by caffeine and chips staring at
multithreaded C++, wondering what the frickety we did wrong. We had a blast. But
somehow I was never really hooked, and I couldn't tell you why.

I can, however, tell you why I am hooked now. Having so many people with so many
different backgrounds and so much domain knowledge around me is amazing. I
learned more about Rust in two days than I could have if I was on my own simply
because of two awesome pairing partners. And I'd like to think I gave something
back, mostly my domain knowledge about programming language implementation—all
of my pairings thus far were compiler related in some way. With other people
I've worked on:

- A Lisp compiler in Rust with an LLVM backend (other person's project)
- A virtual machine in Rust (my project)
- A lexer for the lambda calculus in Python (other person's project)

All of these have been amazing, and when I come back to work I plan on doing
these more. They're insightful—for me anyway, but hopefully not exclusively—,
engaging and entertaining.

# New tools keep my workflow sharp

Before going to RC I already had a solid workflow—or so I thought. But sometimes
even a few changes help to realize that with a bit of tweaking it can get *even*
better, no matter how comfortable you are. This might seem obvious, but I know I
haven't tried out something new to mix up my routine in years. I try to stay on
top of my game when it comes to technology, and maybe I should try and practice
the same rigorous experiments with softer skills? It's at least worth exploring.
