When I was in third grade, I took part in a reading competition. Everyone was
asked to bring a book they really liked and read it for the audience. We were
then told who had won, without getting any feedback. I lost, and asked one of
the teachers what was wrong with my reading. She told me that the book had been
too dark. I was in third grade, but I knew that that was unjust.

The book was about a young boy’s experiences on a slave ship from Africa to the
Americas. I cannot remember the title, but I know that I had found it in the
school’s library. It was red, with a black and white print of a slave ship on
it.

Last year someone broke my jaw bone. Initially I laughed the encounter off, but
as the headaches set in and I looked at myself in the mirror, I realized that
something was off. My head had a dent approximately where the left temple was.
That unsettled me enough that I took a few pain pills and a taxi to the
hospital. The nurses told me it was probably nothing, the CT scan told me my
jaw bone was fractured. I spent a few hours in the hospital, then they swiped
my insurance card and I paid five bucks. Universal healthcare is communism.

![](/assets/sun.png)

I went through the encounter of that night a lot; I replayed it in my head
over and over again, sometimes full of vengeful thoughts, sometimes searching
for some sort of lesson, or maybe closure. Sometimes there is no lesson, but
eventually closure came over me, like a sun that sets painfully slowly.

![](/assets/moon.png)

This essay is art if I say so.

This essay is so if I say art.

This art if I so is say essay.

Writing has always been cathartic for me, more so than programming. I’m not a
terribly talented writer, but I’m dedicated to the craft. That’s sometimes true
for programming as well, although I’m not as dedicated to the final product.
I’m not a great editor for my own code. Sometimes I cut corners. Don’t tell
anyone.

Call it pragmatism. But there are no excuses here, in my editor. In software
there almost always are. Everything is terrible and leaky and I feel like I’m
really working as a drainer in a particularly bad part of town in a town that
has no good parts. Ever feel that way?

![](/assets/earth.png)

I’m the only smoker in this group of computational artists. That’s weird to me.
Maybe I have a weird view into the European art bòheme, but all of my artsy
friends smoke. Cigarettes are very cheap around here. We run on fumes. Good
joke, everyone laughs.

The days get ever shorter. Soon there will be no light, and christmas will
come to consume us all. There will be trees—trees, I tell you! And maybe, if
you make it out alive, there will be light again. And there will still be
trees, and they will be naked, and people won’t see them. What I’m saying is
that winters are very moody.

The book had a lasting impact on me. That boy’s story stays with me even today,
even as I can’t recall its title, or quote anything from it. Sometimes those
kinds of influences are subliminal, ethereal, and you don’t think about them in
years. What I do remember is that I was the only kid who wasn’t encouraged, in
one way or another, to read. All of the other kids came with their parents, and
I don’t think they were enjoying themselves very much.
